Right, so I'm going to talk through the seminar on AI agents that I'm going to hold on Thursday
at the UCL physics department. I'm looking at the slides right now. I'm going to get slide number
one and I'm making annotations and I'm also going to talk through what I think should be added,
missing blah blah blah blah blah about all of these slides. So I'm going to keep the first
slide here. I don't like the title AI coding agents. That should be changed. I will later
indicate what the correct title is. I don't like the reductive part of the character physicist.
Yeah, I'll just add, I will change the title and indicate what that should be after this note.
My name is fine there, but we should have the affiliations at least,
LUH plus the logo plus the innavalia plus the innavalia logo. Okay, why this talk? That's good.
I'm happy with that. At this moment, I'm going to say something like,
yeah, in case you've been living under a rock, things happened, pretty dramatic things happened
in the development of AI tools in 2025. There were two cornerstone moments, keystone, whatever
the right word might be. One was in quarter, the first quarter of 2025 when cord code was
released. And the second extremely significant development in 2025 was the release of the
frontier models like OPUS 4.5 and GPT 5.2. And at this moment, I would probably insert a screen cap,
a screen capture of a press release by open AI that GPT 5.2 had made some amazing development
through it. Physics is sort of crap as usual because they've been going through this shit,
but it should be enough to sort of activate the audience with physicists. And so I'd have that
headline coming up after the why this talk slide and
between the three moments slide. So I've got a blank slide that I'm going to write this on.
So I'm going to say put here the GPT 5.2 physics result press release. That should be enough to
make theoretical physicists go, uh-huh, and be somewhat existentially concerned. So that slide
there is the one that's missing and that should be inserted will be just this green cap of that
press release. I believe it came out a week or two ago. Maybe two weeks ago, I can't remember.
Now I'm onto the three moments slide. Yeah, so I'd like to highlight in the seminar that there
were three key moments in the past couple of years where AI tools sort of transitioned from
from novelty, curiosity through to genuinely useful. So the first one was the was in 2022 with
the major launch of chat GPT. And then in quarter one called code and in quarter four, the models
crossing the threshold. I've already spoken about that. When I give the seminar, it'll make sense.
And on this particular slide, the three moments slide, there are three blue dots that need to
be eliminated. They don't look correct. Then I'm gonna have the quick survey. I don't like to raise
your hands. I'll say that aloud. And uh, I'm gonna, I'm gonna say it like,
yeah, instead of raise your hand if you have, it's like, I would probably just say have, yeah,
experience maybe. I don't know. Something like the slide should be quick survey experience.
And, you know, instead of used, just have
something like
I want to put cursor and co pilot up one because cloud code is like the most advanced level thing.
So, you know, there should be three points that I could check in on the audience on, you know, like,
have you just used a cloud Gemini in chat? Then the second one is, have you used like an IDE plus
LLM to write code, right? Like curse or copilot. And then the third level, like, I don't expect
many people will have done this will be like, have you used called code or coding agent?
And I'm writing this down on the slide. So that quick survey slide comes after the
three moments slide. And actually, probably after the, yeah, right, after the quick survey slide,
I would like to start seeing things like the following.
So after the quick survey slide, I will want to talk a bit about if you experimented with chat in
quarter one of 2025, then
you may have dismissed
LLMs as being useful for anything but a very limited set of use cases.
And, you know, I did, right? So in quarter one 2025, I experimented with chat. And I found it to be
maximally unreliable. And I'm still pretty kind of cranky about the models of 2025.
And I'm going to have a slide, you know, as I was a skeptic, I
am still annoyed at models of quarter one 2025. And then this the slide after the I was a skeptic
should be LLMs are incredibly capable, but maximally untrustworthy. There should be something
like they lie, they cheat, they steal, and they flatter. And, and this is like, you know, all
terrible for science, you know, for hard reproducible science. And so in quarter one,
and then I come to the evidence, you know, like seductively correct equations that just nonsense.
And then when you push back on a valid proof, the chat finds a bug, LLM finds a bug
that isn't even there, you know, and then I got burnt. And then I got curious, right? So that's
cool. That's fine. We'll go with that. You know,
what I want to do is add a slide here. So what I'm going to do is after the evidence slide,
there's another note slide where I want to say something like, you know,
it's good to have a mental model
of LLM and mine is, you know, slightly deranged.
You know, hyper motivated MSC stream.
It'll be kind of fun to have a picture here.
Okay. So after that, we've got this thousands of hours of deliberate practice,
November to the day. I just don't like that it looks boastful.
I definitely don't want to give off that sense of humble brag or brag or any kind of, you know,
it's just like my journey. I found this interesting. If you do,
you're welcome to join me kind of thing. And then I've got, I'm going to also
submit some handwritten notes, which correlate with this, you know,
at this point in the presentation, instead of the thousand of hours of deliberate practice,
I want to have the 123 slide here where it goes, you know, LLM deliberate practice is required,
right? I think that's, that's what I'm saying to, you know, LLMs are useful.
All right. That's what I really want to say. But, you know, one deliberate practice is required.
Two, you need to pay, right? Just chat is no good. And you need to install
a coding agent to get the full power, right? Otherwise it's pointless. So yeah,
I annotated the slide and made those comments and correlated it with the notes that I'm going to
also supply here. And then what do we need? And instead of, you know, the what I build,
this is just, you know, this is, this is brag. No, it's not good, right? I don't want to like
have a list of like, oh, look how cool I am. I don't know what to do with that. Maybe we'll
just put these slides later. But actually, yeah, we need to have something right at this point.
Why, why is a physicist listening to this talk? You know,
I want to say something like, you know, workflow
with the correct workflow.
So the correct workflow, you can, you know, amazing things are possible. How about that?
And the audience is physics. So like, instead of just this random list of projects that I've done,
which are cool, I'm happy to tell people about, I really should focus on formalization stuff.
You know, there's this thing that I built this vibe felt this auto formalize a vibe felt.
I don't want to say we'll look how clever I am. I built this thing, rather, you know,
auto formalization is real. You know, especially if you are doing theoretical physics that's
mathematically rigorizable, so to speak. So auto formalization is real. And it's now possible
to write new science is now possible. So I want to say something like that on these slides,
and that you could do this with all with basic tooling.
No extras of subscripts subscriptions, you don't have to pay anyone apart from, you know,
your subscription to to to Claude or whatever. You don't have to pay anyone else to have the full
power of of AI. AI tooling and
you know, sort of, I don't know. So now I'm looking at the slide, all of this was built
with AI coding agents. So instead of that sort of, you know, like, you know, the era of
what do we want to say here of automated, you know, instead of eras is like automated,
you know, research is possible with correct tooling and expert guidance, right? And expert
guidance. This is the key thing, the expert, I'm going to improve. And I'm going to say the human
equals ground truth lots, right? Okay, so you know, now this is let me show you the entire
trick. I don't quite let me show you the entire trick. I don't, I don't, I don't, you know,
I just don't like that sense. You know, instead of let me show you the entire trick,
I like this slide. I mean, it should be there. But what should be correct is something more like,
you know, all of this is masked, all of the power. If you look,
you know, as a, it's more like, you know, it's all possible. So let's walk back a bit. So I'm
still looking at the, let me show you the entire trick slide. So this is all possible with basic
tooling, that is to say formalization and doing auto, you know, automating research and accelerating
research, right? Accelerating research is all possible is possible. Now I'm looking back at that,
all of this was built with AI coding agents slide. So all of this is well possible. But first,
you need to, but your experience, you know, your experience probably has been different.
Okay, I continue. So I'm looking at the, let me show you the entire trick slide. And I'm wondering
what I could do to somehow change it because I just don't like that sentence. And what I'm thinking
is that, is that, you know, let, I don't know how to word this into a nice sentence, but I want to
say to them, you know, as a scientifically trained audience, you will likely appreciate an explanation
of how LLMs work. And this will go a long way to explain the strange behaviors. And also, you know,
I want to take out, I want to make it clear that I hate magic and mystery.
You know, maybe I don't say that on the slide, but you know, LLMs
can be understood.
Ah, what the hell happened to the slide here? LLMs can be understood. That's what I effectively,
I want to say at this moment. And LLMs can be understood. And that's the purpose of this seminar,
right? You know, to go from, you know, ground up to, you know, coding agents. So the real purpose
of the seminar is to actually explain to the physicist audience how LLMs work. And then with
that knowledge, right, you're all smart enough in this audience, with that knowledge, you'll be able to
exploit the powers of chat, the coding agents, and understand also why they behave the way they
behave and how to mitigate that. I guess I want to say that. So what is an LLM? That's all good.
You know, the observable, you know, so from, I don't like the word observable interface.
Yeah, instead of the observable interface, I just want to say a large language model, right? We've
got to have, really need, you know, from the outside, looking in.
You know, an LLM is a function from string to string, from a string to a string, from the outside,
the API behavior, this is the entire observable behavior, there's no hidden state carry between
the calls. They're stateless, which is to say, each evaluation is independent, no memory between
calls, that's good. They're non deterministic, same input, different outputs, the model samples from
and here this missing text. And how do they sample? They sample by computing, you know,
LLM gives a probability distribution. And then, then it samples, right?
Direct analogy with Boltzmann is good. And then, you know, we could talk about temperature limits. So
when it, because this is a direct analogy with Boltzmann, we talk about temperatures like how
random or how random is when exploiting to sample from the probability distribution.
That an LLM produces. So, you know, there's a kind of missing slide here, right? You know, an LLM
produces a probability distribution and it samples from it. I'm looking at the temperature slide here.
That might go in the previous, or there needs to be a slide in between, right?
Slide in between, I'm running this down. And then, temperature limits, your uniform, that's cool.
And then, tokens, actually, not strings, not string to string, you know, sort of unpacking things,
but rather, token, the set of tokens tends to end times, whatever, crossing times.
So what is a token? Subword chunks from a fixed vocabulary be of 100,000 entries or so.
That's all cool. And then, yeah, one forward pass through a frozen, you know,
and what is a LLM equals? One forward pass through a frozen neural network, there's no
learning, there's no state mutation. And then, the summary, cool, an LLM is a stateless, you know,
but I can't read a summary, right? We're not summarizing.
And so now, the illusion of chat is great, love it. A single API calls a client
with a prompt, which is a string to an API, and the API gives you the completion to a string.
One string in, one string out, that's the entire interaction.
So what's missing here is a single API. So there's something missing, right?
And that is like, you know, an LLM exposed via, or rather, you interact
with LLM via a single API call. One string in, one string out, that's all good.
The HTTP reality, I better check this, but it looks good.
How chat works, turn, user one, that says something, then the string gets completed,
then you paste it back in, the client resends the entire history every time.
Yeah, LLM has no memory, the client maintains the illusion. It's great.
The context window, in here, we really need a picture, right? Context, I need a bar,
I need a bar chart, right? With an under brace, and, you know, tokens,
and, you know, context length is so critical at this point, right? We're gonna have an under brace
there. And when the conversation exceeds the context length, something must be dropped.
Typical sizes is 8k for the free chat interface, right? 200k for paid
coding agents, was the paid frontier model.
And that's why they get amnesia, right? So there needs to be a context rock slide.
So another slide is required. Context rot, amnesia.
Slide, that's happened here. And now we come to the system prompt, which is a hidden preamble
prepended to every call, it shapes behavior, it's just more text, you know, link to the
anthropic prompt that was leaked, just like a webpage address.
And then we come to chat as a loop, memories and illusion maintained by the client.
Beautiful. I don't like full stops. Get rid of those full stops.
And now from function to agent, the agent loop. So then I'll probably start called code up.
You know, I'll have code, I guess, in the web interface.
So we need an extra slide here. You know, web interface as a demonstration.
Demo is chat. And then I'll have a terminal open as well.
For the API call.
And now we come to the agent loop. I'm not done response. This is the complete
architecture of a coding agent. It's all good. So the agent loop, you know,
system prompt, pass history goes into the LLM, the LLM responds, pass the tool calls,
calls, executes tools, gives the results of the LLM. Some of these things are a bit screwed
up these arrows here. So the arrow coming from the execute tools should come back in
around and into the LLM box. But that's all good. So what does it mean tools?
So not definition, but rather just tools. You describe tools and system prompt and
LLM generates structured text. Here's all these punctuation lines I don't like.
Scaffolding paths and executes. The LLM never executes anything, right? That's excellent like that.
Two tools, right? Read file, write file. That's enough to do useful work. Get rid of the full
stop after use for work. And then chord code, cursor, copods. The same loop. More tools,
better prompts than full stop. Live demo, watch the agent work. Better work, huh?
And so now we come to the what should we try?
Yeah, I don't like that. It's good to go. And then there's all these examples. It's just like
that couple that couple that crap. Don't want it. I don't want it. I'm going to freestyle that.
And definitely no raise your hand. I just somehow hate that. Okay, but that's it for the first
observations and rounds. So we'll stop here.
